It could be argued that the Austro-Prussian war of 1866 had a greater impact on the unification of Germany than the Schleswig-Holstein conflict of 1864 and the Franco-Prussian war of 1870-71.
In support of this interpretation we can consider a number of factors. Firstly, the Austro-Prussian war made certain that Prussia was the dominant force in Germany and directly led to the establishment of the North German Confederation, which has been seen by many historians to be ‘a state... no different from the German Empire’ which shows that the direct result of the Austro-Prussian war was not just a North German Confederation but also the creation of the German state which persisted until 1918. On top of this, it showed the dominance of Prussia militarily – even fighting against most of the German Confederation alongside Austria, the war only lasted a matter of weeks. This further emphasised Prussian superiority and hegemony throughout Germany. By contrast, the Schleswig-Holstein conflict, while it was a very quick war, did not do much to achieve Bismarck’s goals or achieve unification. It did make conflict between Austria and Prussia somewhat inevitable and it turned the attitudes of many North German states against Prussia, as the princes had been hoping for the recognition of the new duke while Bismarck aimed for annexation. On the other hand, in 1870 it can be said that German unification was already a done deal and Bismarck was only fighting France out of tactical interests – he was concerned that if France retained control of Alsace-Lorraine then it would leave an easy path for invading Germany. Therefore, it is difficult to argue that the Franco-Prussian war was significant in the unification of Germany. It could be maintained that the South German states only agreed to unity with the North German Confederation as a result of their fear of French invasion because of the Ems Telegram – which may be true, but these states by and large agreed to join Germany before the Franco-Prussian war had begun. In summary, it seems that the Austro-Prussian war was the most significant war between 1864 and 1871 with regards to German unification.
It could also be considered that the most important war was in fact the Schleswig-Holstein conflict of 1864. While the direct treaty results of this war might not seem exceptionally relevant to German unification, the importance was that the division of Schleswig and Holstein between Prussia and Austria caused Austro-Prussian relations to grow increasingly hostile, and made it much easier for Bismarck to justify war with Austria than it might otherwise have been. The peace agreed upon at the Gastein convention, while it seemed to cede some benefits to Austria, was in fact wholly in Prussia’s interests, and ‘by the autumn of 1864 it had dawned on Rechberg... that he had blundered; Austria had gained nothing by supporting Bismarck in Schleswig-Holstein’. The situation in Schleswig-Holstein also enabled Bismarck to convinced Napoleon III to enter into an Alliance with Prussia, and by exploiting his interest in nationalism Bismarck was able to buy support for German cultural union under Prussia. Napoleon wanted the situation to be resolved quickly, as Prussia and Austria being united over the issue of Schleswig-Holstein troubled him and made him worry that he would lose influence in Germany. Because of this, Bismarck was able to ensure French neutrality should war break out between Austria and Prussia. Therefore, it could also be said that the Schleswig-Holstein conflict was also critical for German unification in that it made sure there would be minimal intervention in Prussia’s war with Austria, enabling the Austro-Prussian war to go much more smoothly and for Prussia to place itself at the head of a new German state. And so, it is possible to argue that the Schleswig-Holstein conflict had a very significant impact on the unification of Germany, and that it also had an impact on the outcome of the later Austro-Prussian war which was extremely significant as well. On balance, the Austro-Prussian war was still a more important war for German unification if examined in isolation, but in fact the war may not have happened at all – or gone the way it did – were it not for the events surrounding Schleswig-Holstein. For this reason the Schleswig-Holstein conflict must still be kept in mind when talking about the importance of Prussia’s wars between 1864 and 1871.
However, it is also possible to claim that the Franco-Prussian war had the most significant impact on German unification. After all, it was as a result of this war that the German empire was finally created, and it was because of the perceived threat from France that the remaining independent southern German states agreed to unite with the North German Confederation. Previous to the Franco-Prussian war, Bismarck had been struggling with the regional loyalties in Bavaria, and the Ems Telegram gave him the perfect excuse to push aside any regional qualms and utilise the resulting nationalism to bring the southern German states together with the North German Confederation to form the German empire. On top of this, it was the only one of the three wars discussed in this essay where Bismarck’s aims aligned, at least significantly, with the nationalists’. In the Schleswig-Holstein conflict Bismarck pressed for annexation even when the nationalists would have preferred recognition of the new duke, and during the Austro-Prussian war nationalists were displeased that Prussia was effectively fighting against other German states. However, in the Franco-Prussian war Bismarck was able to unite Germans in a common cause against the French, and by using the anger of the nationalists who felt that their King had been insulted by the French ambassador he was able to justify his war, and bring together the German states against a common – and foreign – foe. This was important, because it enabled Bismarck to portray the war not just as a Prussian war of aggression, but as a national struggle of Germany as the French sought to keep her divided. This was key, in that it brought Bismarck support from the nationalists in bringing the Southern states into the Empire, and enabled him to slyly ensure that Prussia’s privileged position was still maintained, even under an illusion of pan-Germanism. In conclusion, the Franco-Prussian war let Bismarck properly use nationalist feeling to achieve his aims, and finally brought together all of the disparate German states – aside from Austria, who by this time was more occupied with events in the south-east – to form an empire with Prussia at the helm. However, it is difficult to claim that the Franco-Prussian war was more significant than the Austro-Prussian war in the cause of German unification. It would seem that the Austro-Prussian war still had a much greater impact, because without the Austro-Prussian war there would have been no North German Confederation, and no likely reason for the South German states to wish for unification with Prussia.
Overall, it can be concluded that the Austro-Prussian war of 1866 was the most important war of this period for Germany, and that it had a greater impact on unification than the wars of 1864 and 1870-71. While the other wars had significant repercussions, it cannot be denied that without Prussian victory in 1866 there would have been no hope for German unification to proceed. Austria had little interest in a German cultural union and already had significant distractions in Hungary and further along the Danube. Therefore, it can be seen that without the war of 1866 taking place there would have been little hope for German unification.
